# Defining Offensive and Defensive Positions in College Basketball to Build Optimal Rosters for Maximum Tournament Success

While basketball is considered a “positionless” sport, we attempt to create more precise position labels that help teams understand the value and role of each player. We chose to do this for the NCAA rather than the NBA because the amount of research regarding position definitions is limited for the NCAA in comparison to the NBA. We defined the traditional G, F, and C positions using a random forest model that incorporated players’ physical attributes and shot selections. We also clustered players separately on offense and defense using a variety of different metrics along with their physical attributes and shot selections. We defined players separately on offense and defense to more accurately group players together. The random forest and clusters allowed us to use a probabilistic approach that outputs the likelihood of each player being labeled in a specific position or cluster grouping. This approach allowed us to also create hybrid positions for players who had similar probability values for different positions or clusters. We believe a combination of our predicted traditional position with offensive and defensive cluster groups provides more insight into the true nature of a player’s role on a team. For
example, Mike Daum is labelled as F-4-7 which indicates that our model identified him as a primary forward in offensive cluster 4 and defensive cluster 7. With ten years of NCAA data, we were able to create the ideal roster by relating team lineups to tournament success. We looked at the rosters of teams who made it to the Elite 8 or further during March Madness to understand which specific positions commonly appeared together on these teams. We believe that this will provide insights to coaching staffs when targeting high school and transfer recruits.

The implications of this project could result in millions of dollars being paid to a conference for a team making a large run throughout the tournament. If a team bases their recruiting on finding players who would conform to the clusters our model predicts as significant and positive towards winning, they could largely increase their probability to go on a tournament run. Each tournament win for a team results in the addition of one “unit” to be given to their conference. For an example of how much a tournament run can be worth, in 2011, VCU’s Final 4 run from the play-in game earned the Colonial Athletic Association $9.12 million (USA Today). While the model’s predictions of later rounds is not poor, it can be clearly seen that the model has worse results in the later rounds as compared to the earlier rounds. We believe this would be due to the smaller sample size of teams who have appeared in the later rounds, for example, we have observed eight-times more teams in the Round of 32 as compared to the Final 4.

Considering the data has this discrepancy, we would expect the model to be better suited for predicting early round success. If we used more past data, it would be expected that the model’s win percentage would improve, as a larger sample size would increase the strength of the model. Based on our results, we believe that if teams were to decide their high school and transfer recruiting targets based on their conformity to our highly successful clusters, they would drastically increase their chances to go on a deep run in the NCAA Tournament.
